papers should be short enough to be interesting (maximum of 10 pages) and long enough to be complete (minimum 5 pages).  please use times fonts, 11pt, 1.2-1.5 spacing, 1" margins all around.
please add in the paper a section talking about 
- how many hours did it take for the entire project to be completed
- how many lines of code you had to write or modify




Last summer I had a very clear goal. I had gone home the previous three summers and worked as a server at restaurants in my home town. The money was great, it was fun, and I was able to live at home, but it was just very unfulfilling. I found myself craving programming projects, so I collaborated with friends from school and read textbooks while I wasn't working. I decided that it was time to leave the restaurant business and never look book, and dive into my first programming internship. My goal was simple: get a summer intenrship in Pittsburgh where I would apply my programming knowledge.

I found a fantastic opportunity to be a Summer Associate (don't call them interns!) with UPMC. I was very excited for what my summer would bring, as the recruiting process was spectacular. I initially interviewed with an HR representative, then with a panel of potential mentors/managers for the summer, and finally with a VP in charge of the entire Summer Associates program. They told me all about the fun and challenging summer that being a Summer Associate would provide, and they even had a pretty engaging video of one of the past SA's experience. Despite being told they would wait at least a week to make their decision, I received a call two days after my final interview and they made me an offer. I was thrilled!

Looking back, I think there were a few major issues with that process. The first is that I was told again and again about the Summer Associate program itself, but never specifically about the nature of my work. I was given examples of some of the more successful projects from past years, but not given a sense of the overwhelming amount of projects that yielded no results. And most importantly, I still had no idea what I would be doing over the summer. It's hard to believe I was so naive, but I was completely lured in by the promises of a great summer with other interns, fun activities, leadership development opportunities, and challenging work, that I didn't imagine it could end poorly.

My first major sign to start being worried was when I got my job assignment. I was assigned to work with Joe Furmanski in the Forbes Tower Data Center. I immediately started googling around for information on what kind of work was done there, as I had no data center expeirence, but my searches didn't provide much. I was able to find some confereneces Joe had attended and read about some partnerships with IBM and the like, but that was it. When I met with Joe (my manager)and Jim (my mentor), a few days later at Red Oak Cafe to talk about the project, my heart sank a bit.

Joe and Jim were both looking pretty stressed and upset when I met with them. I figured they were just in the middle of something pretty big, but as it would turn out Jim was miserable nearly every single day of the summer. Anyways, they told me I would be very very busy over the summer, which I was happy about. I get anxious when I don't have work to do, so I was very happy they would be keeping me busy. I started asking about what sort of programming I would be doing, and they looked confused. Joe told me that I would be 'hacking around' on a Microsoft Surface tablet (which he referred to throughout the summer as 'the device'), but he wouldn't give me more specific details. He also listed off a few other projects they would give to me, but for each one he seemed to have no more than a few sentences of high-level reasoning for the project, not an actual assignment or problem to solve.

I was taken aback after that first meeting, for a few reasons. The first is that neither of them seemed good at holding eye contact for more than a few words at a time. I understand that some technology-oriented people have poor communication skills, but I expected a little more than that. Second, I couldn't help but notice that they seemed to be miserable, with no real passion for their work or enjoyment from what they do. As they described some of the challenges they'd solved over the past few years, there was no pride in what they'd accomplished. And most importantly, there didn't seem to be a clear plan of action for what I would do once I started.

Fast forward a month, and I'm at my orientation. Its a typical long, boring, corporate HR seminar, but after a few hours they break us off into our individual areas and let us talk to our peers. This was a really positive experience for me. I love interacting with my peers and getting to know people and their motiviations. I had a lot of fun joking with my group and talking about how we thought the summer would go, but I couldn't help but notice I was more qualified than the rest of the tech people. Many of them seemed to have very little programming exeprience and in fact didn't even enjoy programming. This was really worrisome for me, as I was starting to realize that the summer may not be filled with programming, but I pushed on anyways. When I got my actual packet of information specific to what I would be doing over the summer, it was literally blank except for my manager and mentor's names at the top of the page. That should have been an enormous warning sign.

When I got to my desk (which was in a cubicle in the back corner of an office with no windows, only 12 full-size printers), my mentor just dropped me off, told me that I was taking the desk of a guy named Todd who was in the process of being laid off (and so, he may come back yelling at me at some point, but just ignore him), and left. I had some initial stuff to do like setting up Outlook and writing on the Summer Associates' blog, but that was it. After an hour I was ready for action, so I went off in search of my mentor. When I found him he told me to just go back to my desk and he would find something for me to do.

As it turns out, there was nothing to do. And there would continue to be nothing to do for 12 weeks. Every single week would start with a meeting where my manager would say the same tired phrase "We have to get the kid [me] working on something. We need some results out of this." Every single week, my mentor would avoid me, look miserable, complain about how demanding his wife was during her pregnancy, and not much more. Within the first week I was already starting to get nervous that I would not be doing serious programming or even much work at all over the summer, so I started reaching out. I talked to the other interns, who nearly universally told me that the same thing was happening to them- they had no work- but most of them were just fine with it and enjoyed being paid for nothing. I talked to my parents, who told me that I should wait it out for a few days and see if it got better. I talked to HR, who assured me that it simply could not be the case that there wasn't work to do. I talked to my manager, who promised that soon they would give me 'the device' (the Surface), and I would start up on the project ASAP.

The summer just never turned for the better. I didn't receive the Surface device for 9 weeks, and by the time I got it all of the meaningful work had already been finished. My other large project (analysis for a third data center) was cancelled due to a lack of funds. I watched as some of my peers moved onto challenging work and the majority of them just became complacent in doing nothing. I became depressed, and started seeking counseling through the company's free LifeSolutions center. I truly did not enjoy my internship, but I did learn a lot out of it.

Did I accomplish my goals? Absolutely not. I reached out constantly for support from my superiors, but I was never given any sort of assignment that met my skill set. I truly believe that anyone from any discipline could have accomplished what I accomplished last summer, and I am extremely upset about that.

I wish going in that I had been more persistent in finding out exactly the nature of my work and what I would be doing. Specifically, I should have continuously asked if I would actually be programming, and not accepted the offer until I got a clear answer. I wish going in that I had rejected the initial assignment in the Data Center and pushed for the Technology Development Center instead.

The best part of the internship were the times I spent with my peers, laughing, commiserating, and finding out more about them. It was the best part because it was pretty much the only time I felt in my element. When I wasn't with the other interns I was surrounded by coworkers all aged 40 and up, doing PC support and printer maintenance. 

The thing I learned the most is that I can never settle for a work environment like that again. I will never allow myself to get depressed like I did last summer because I have nothing to do, no one to talk to, and a truly miserable set of mentors and managers. I now know that I cannot settle for doing nothing; cannot be complacent with getting paid for having my projects cancelled.

I feel no background would have prepared me for this, except maybe some Yoga classes.

I ended up writing a dozen or so scripts which will probably be thrown away because none of my superiors understand programming. 
